https://features.csis.org/scenarios2035/ 
 
The goal of scenario planning is to understand more about the future, not to predict it. Identifying 
key drivers of change, as well as understanding their second- and third-order effects and the 
interrelationships between them, does more than help to prepare for contingencies—it also helps to 
look for warning indicators and triggers of profound change, and it can drive action to prevent 
scenarios from coming about in the first place. 
 
The CSIS Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy drafted several scenarios to help think 
through aspects of the world in 2035. It then turned to trusted experts, inside and outside of CSIS, for 
their comments, insights, and concerns. The experts' contributions overlay the scenarios themselves, 
highlighting further areas of emphasis, implications, or alternative outcomes. 
 
Scenario 1: China Stalls 
Written by: 
Expert headshot 
Jon B. Alterman 
Zbigniew Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy; CSIS 
With comments from: 
Expert headshot 
Ryan Hass 
Director, John L. Thornton China Center; Brookings 
Expert headshot 
Scott Kennedy 
Senior Adviser and Trustee Chair in Chinese Business and Economics; CSIS 
Expert headshot 
Bonny Lin 
Director, China Power Project and Senior Adviser; CSIS 
Expert headshot 
Rush Doshi 
C.V. Starr Senior Fellow for Asia Studies and Director of the China Strategy Initiative; CFR 
"China Stalls" is part of Scenarios That Could Define 2035, a series that seeks to understand more 
about the future. The CSIS Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy drafted several 
scenarios to help think through aspects of the world in 2035. It then turned to trusted experts, inside 
and outside of CSIS, for their comments, insights, and concerns. The experts' contributions overlay 
the scenarios themselves, highlighting further areas of emphasis, implications, or alternative 
outcomes. 
 
Click here to explore other scenarios. 
 
China faces serious headwinds, and it is possible that its economic challenges have begun to sap the 
energy behind its global rise. One headwind is not China's fault: By their very nature, developing 
economies tend to grasp the low-hanging fruit early in their growth. As their economies grow larger 
and more complex, and as businesses begin to maximize efficiencies and streamline processes, 
economic growth inevitably slows. It is easy to grow swiftly from a low base, and it is nearly 
impossible to do so from a high one. 1 
 
Another headwind for China is its demographic outlook. China's adoption of the one-child policy in 
1979 created a demographic dividend. In 1975, the United Nations estimated that for every 10 
Chinese of working age, there were 8 who were too old or too young to work; by 2010, the number 
who were not expected to work was half that. Now, with Chinese fertility stubbornly low and the 
population aging, the trends are reversing. According to current estimates, by 2075, every 10 Chinese 
workers will be supporting 10 dependents, and by 2093, that number will rise to 13. 
 
In addition, China's population peaked in 2021 at 1.4 billion people. It is set to sink to under a billion 
in 2070 and continue drifting down to 639 million by 2100. While these are still very large numbers 
by any measure, shrinking populations depress markets for everything from real estate to 
manufactured goods. 2 
 
The other headwinds are many: a burst real estate bubble, sagging productivity growth, growing 
tensions 3 with the United States that restrict technology inputs, and a leadership that seems less 
willing than its predecessors to let entrepreneurs roam free. Government statistics are enjoying less 
trust amid suspicions that conditions are worse than the government is willing to admit. 
Businesspeople are concerned that the Chinese banking system is not only full of nonperforming 
loans but has also lost much of its dynamism. Local governments in China have been especially 
affected by deteriorating economic conditions, and they are cutting spending on infrastructure 
projects and other important initiatives. 
 
While China has steadily expanded for four decades, it is worth considering what a steadily 
contracting China might look like in the future. In part, it would enjoy less soft power. China has 
earned widespread admiration for producing sharp economic growth uninterrupted by social 
upheaval. Economic stagnation maintained through authoritarian control is a less remarkable feat, 
and while it is not currently the Chinese calling card, it could be. 4 
 
If some in the United States have their way, the movement of manufacturing out of China and into 
countries that are closer to the United States—whether ideologically or geographically—would drop 
Chinese growth further. Whether one calls it “de-risking” or “decoupling,” a reduced U.S. export 
market for China, combined with restrictions on technology that China can import from the United 
States and its partners, would change conditions in China significantly. Arguably, that would advance 
U.S. interests at China's expense, although how the United States would pursue it and how China 
would respond are open questions. 
 
Whichever way the United States pursues de-risking, it would likely put a further damper on foreign 
direct investment in China because it would create uncertainty about the prospects of exporting to 
the United States, the world's largest market. While that alone would not force a contraction in the 
Chinese economy, it would contribute to it. 
 
A contracting China would also spread less cash around the world. By 2017, China had become the 
world's largest official creditor, with its loans exceeding the combined value of those of the World 
Bank, International Monetary Fund, and all 22 wealthy governments that constitute the Paris Club. 
The Belt and Road Initiative seized imaginations because of expectations about its scope and scale. 
Not only has the initiation of program projects slowed, but overall Chinese lending to developing 
countries has slowed as well. According to data from Boston University, China financed $87.0 billion 
of overseas development projects in 2016; by 2021, the total had dropped to $3.7 billion. The 
university also notes that over the last decade, Chinese lending to Africa has increasingly come from 
Chinese commercial banks rather than policy banks. The resultant loans are concentrated less on 
infrastructure and more in revenue-producing industries such as mining and financial services. They 
also have less favorable terms of repayment and can complicate sovereign debt burdens. In the last 
five years, Sri Lanka and Zambia have defaulted on past loans from China, and countries such as 
Pakistan have enacted draconian budget cuts to meet their Chinese debt burdens. Increasingly, China 
is appearing in the role of extractor rather than developer of resources in target countries. 
 
China asserts that it spends $230 billion per year on defense; some in the U.S. government assert 
that the true number is $700 billion. While Westerners can debate the size of the Chinese military 
buildup, there is little question that the Chinese military footprint is currently expanding in Asia and 
around the world. 5 China has the world's largest navy, with more than 370 ships and submarines, 
and it is fielding a nuclear-capable refueled bomber. The Chinese navy paid 27 naval port calls in 
2023, demonstrating its capacity to operate far from Chinese shores. In addition, China sent more 
than 2,000 troops abroad on peacekeeping missions, building goodwill and exhibiting a capability to 
deploy and operate far from Chinese shores. China is also rapidly expanding its military technology 
base, with advancements ranging from aircraft carriers to advanced fighter jets and autonomous 
systems. 
 
An economic slowdown would constrain China's military growth. Facing a traditional choice between 
guns and butter, 6 China's leaders would have to be even more selective about what military 
capabilities they are willing invest in, what contingencies they will prepare for, and what locations 
they will protect. A tightening fiscal environment will narrow the choices China's leaders have to 
exercise national power. 7 
 
Despite its challenges, China is currently more economically, diplomatically, and even militarily 
dominant than Russia. Yet, over time, it may begin to fall behind India, which has already surpassed 
China in population and is exhibiting stronger economic growth (albeit from a lower base). 8 India 
has attracted significant investment from the Arabian Peninsula, which has historic ties to the 
subcontinent. A growing India could hem in China's rise in Asia, and it could squeeze out Chinese 
relationships in parts of the Middle East. Since the United States views India as a more benign power, 
the United States may abet India's rise in a way that constrains China and gives the United States a 
relative advantage. 
 
 
Scenario 2: U.S. Global Leadership Falters 
Written by: 
Expert headshot 
Jon B. Alterman 
Zbigniew Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy; CSIS 
With comments from: 
Expert headshot 
Eliot A. Cohen 
Arleigh A. Burke Chair in Strategy; CSIS 
Expert headshot 
Kori Schake 
Senior Fellow and Director of Foreign and Defense Policy Studies; American Enterprise Institute 
Expert headshot 
Mara Karlin 
Professor of Practice; John Hopkins SAIS 
Expert headshot 
James Goldgeier 
Professor of International Relations; American University 
Expert headshot 
Jude Blanchette 
Distinguished Tang Chair in China Research; Director, RAND China Research Center 
"U.S. Global Leadership Falters" is part of Scenarios That Could Define 2035, a series that seeks to 
understand more about the future. The CSIS Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy 
drafted several scenarios to help think through aspects of the world in 2035. It then turned to trusted 
experts, inside and outside of CSIS, for their comments, insights, and concerns. The experts' 
contributions overlay the scenarios themselves, highlighting further areas of emphasis, implications, 
or alternative outcomes. 
 
Click here to explore other scenarios. 
 
The United States has seen itself in a global leadership role for so long, it is hard for many to imagine 
how a retreat from that role would manifest itself. The United States leapt onto the global stage as 
the Cold War unfolded, abandoning decades of inward focus. It found both security and purpose 
restoring war-ravaged countries in Europe and Asia, as well as building the emerging postcolonial 
countries in Africa and the Middle East. For decades, the United States invested its overwhelming 
economic and military dominance into shaping a global system that others would feel a stake in 
sustaining. What many Americans have come to call the “rules-based order” certainly privileged the 
economic, legal, and governance patterns of the United States and its allies, but it was also 
constraining. 1 It led to limits on U.S. action and lent a certain predictability to it. 
 
But for many Americans, and for the Trump administration, the United States has invested too much 
and reaped too little from subordinating U.S. interests to a so-called “rules-based order” that 
seemingly lets others take advantage of the United States. For them, the U.S. commitment to 
international affairs is an elite luxury, not a bedrock concern, and they perceive recent U.S. 
international efforts as expensive failures—not least multitrillion-dollar efforts in Iraq and 
Afghanistan in the wake of 9/11 whose results fell far short of expectations. 
 
Amid this international context, the U.S. government's budget is under strain, and that strain will 
increase in the coming years. With $7.3 trillion in planned outlays in 2025 and only $5.5 trillion in 
receipts, the U.S. federal budget is far out of balance. A growing cohort of retirees entitled to 
government support, combined with promises to cut taxes further, will put increased pressure on 
government spending. The calls to focus on curtailing foreign engagement are likely to survive long 
beyond when the Trump administration's term ends in January 2029. 2 
 
The effects of a U.S. pullback in international affairs would not be evenly distributed. Given a deep 
and bipartisan consensus that China represents the largest challenge to U.S. global interests, the 
United States will almost certainly maintain a strong if not growing military commitment to the 
western Pacific. 3 India's growing economy, combined with its increasingly agile diplomacy and its 
sometimes-strained ties to China, will draw increased U.S. attention in the coming years, too, as will 
rising economies in Southeast Asia. For countries in the Pacific, it may feel in many ways like the 
United States has not pulled back at all. 
 
But for much of the rest of the world, the United States would likely be felt less. 4 The voices of 
Americans who have argued for more than a decade that the United States has been overcommitted 
to the Middle East would rise, and the time and attention the United States pays to Africa and Latin 
America would fall. Not only would Europe be expected to fend more for itself, but the intra-
European rivalries and tensions that had been blunted under three-quarters of a century of U.S. 
primacy would flourish. 5 
 
Russia and China would seek to expand their ties further into regions that feel newly neglected. 6 
Even more importantly, a growing number of governments would seek to expand their own ties with 
Russia and China, partly to hedge against U.S. abandonment, but also to gain leverage against a 
newly hegemonic United States that feels less bound by international rules. Regional hegemons 
would almost certainly seek to fill the vacuum the United States has left in its wake, requiring 
regional states to make new accommodations to their interests. 7 
 
U.S. commitment to international organizations could also shrink, which would be felt both in terms 
of diplomatic attention as well as budget support. 8 The United States is the largest contributor to 
the UN system, paying just under a quarter of the organization's expenditures. The United States 
spent more than $15 billion on humanitarian assistance in 2023 (including more than $10 billion in 
voluntary contributions to UN agencies such as the World Food Programme, UNICEF, and the UN 
High Commissioner for Refugees) and about $10 billion more on global health. The U.S. role 
supporting the orchestration of such assistance could also diminish, reducing the efficiency and 
effectiveness of aid missions. 9 
 
The broader economic effects of a more unilateral U.S. approach to international affairs are unclear. 
We should expect some slowdown in U.S. efforts to integrate global financial networks, and an 
increase in transparency is expected, combined with an increased effort by others to create parallel 
institutions. Trade would likely grow more regionalized as the security of sea lanes diminishes and 
the robustness of global free trade efforts languishes (or potentially withers under U.S. assault). The 
United States would also emerge as a more aggressive trading partner, using the size of its domestic 
market to win concessions for U.S. exporters. 
 
While none of this necessarily would lead to warfare, there would be a period of adjustment and 
volatility as the world settles into a new equilibrium. Throughout, and perhaps even afterwards, 
governments would need to put a premium on hedging and agility, and businesses would be 
evaluating their prospects in a higher-risk environment. 10 Of course, returns would be higher for 
some, but probably not for all. 
 
 
 
Scenario 3: Trust Fails 
Written by: 
Expert headshot 
Jon B. Alterman 
Zbigniew Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy; CSIS 
With comments from: 
Expert headshot 
Greg Allen 
Director, Wadhwani AI Center; CSIS 
Expert headshot 
Will Carter 
Responsible AI Lead; Accenture Federal Services 
Expert headshot 
Christopher Byrd 
Research Fellow; RAND Corporation 
Expert headshot 
Suzanne Spaulding 
Senior Adviser (Non-resident), Defense and Security Department; CSIS 
"Trust Fails" is part of Scenarios That Could Define 2035, a series that seeks to understand more 
about the future. The CSIS Brzezinski Chair in Global Security and Geostrategy drafted several 
scenarios to help think through aspects of the world in 2035. It then turned to trusted experts, inside 
and outside of CSIS, for their comments, insights, and concerns. The experts' contributions overlay 
the scenarios themselves, highlighting further areas of emphasis, implications, or alternative 
outcomes. 
 
Click here to explore other scenarios. 
 
One of technology's relatively unappreciated qualities is that it has helped boost global trust. The 
internet has become an ecosystem whereby anyone can purchase goods from any seller anywhere in 
the world. Both the buyer and seller have relatively high confidence that the promised goods will be 
delivered and the seller will be paid, even if this is a one-time transaction where the parties have no 
connection to each other. Government identification documents have increasingly moved beyond 
photographs to include definitive biometric data. The global banking system mostly has abandoned 
paper documents that can be forged—or lost—and sends money around the world in a fraction of a 
second. Databases contain vast amounts of information that can verify almost any data point and 
make information available to any mobile phone user anywhere. 
 
Technology's ability to ensure that strangers can trust each other has accelerated and deepened 
economic activities, even in remote places. 1 If one side or another fails to meet obligations, that will 
be recorded in some way in the vast depository of shared information: Credit reports will be hurt, 
online reputations will be tarnished, and platform access will be revoked. In that environment, 
individuals and firms need not limit their engagements to a small number of well-known entities, 
promoting efficiency, innovation, and agility. 
 
However, just as technology has boosted trust, there are increasing signs that technology can be 
used to diminish trust. One part of this dynamic involves disinformation and misinformation. 2 
Deepfakes—which use advanced technology to create visual and audio records of people saying and 
doing things they have not done—are just the beginning. 3 Computing power can be used to create 
false records that either build or tarnish a reputation and can create entities and events that exist 
only in the imagination. 4 Once corruption infects an information system, it compromises the 
presumed integrity of everything in that system. For example, if a hostile actor can change even a 
limited amount of information in a government employment database, every data point for every 
employee potentially becomes suspect. 
 
Disinformation can also reduce the perceived credibility of news sources, spreading knowledge of 
false stories and undermining the credibility of true ones. 5 Citizens' trust in institutions, in 
governments, and in those around them would diminish. 6 
 
A second way technology can diminish trust is through spreading disinformation through social 
media. Because social media's algorithms are optimized for engagement, it tends to support material 
that evokes an emotional reaction. Under these circumstances, misinformation that elicits outrage 
becomes widespread, and information that corrects the misinformation is downplayed. In addition, 
malign actors' own algorithms can create vast amounts of disinformation with relative autonomy, 
allowing those actors to experiment with a wide variety of products to see what works. 7 While most 
social media platforms have a vetting process meant to curb the most serious excesses, critics have 
argued that they are insufficient. When it works at its best, social media connects people with shared 
interests and identities. But social media sometimes does so at the expense of larger, more 
heterogenous communities and can promote internal division. In addition, social media also allows 
for cyberbullying and anonymous attacks, diminishing social trust. 
 
The consequences of a collapse in trust over the next decade would be broad. Economically, it would 
reverse a trend toward global trade dynamism. It would likely result in increased tariffs, require 
increased inspections of shipments, and make arms-length trade connections more difficult. 8 Digital 
platforms would be encumbered, and financial platforms would become less efficient. Reduced trust 
in supply chains, exacerbated by disinformation or fears of cyber sabotage, could disrupt global 
trade. The increased costs of identity verification within societies would also spread widely, and it 
would increase friction in commerce and slow growth. 9 Small- and medium-sized enterprises, which 
lack the resources of larger corporations to manage these risks, would be particularly vulnerable, 
widening economic inequality. 
 
Politically, less trust would be likely to polarize societies, reducing confidence in governmental 
institutions and deepening a sense of pervasive unfairness. 10 Because central governments are 
responsible for engaging with other governments, diminished support for governments would be 
likely to encumber international cooperation, especially on complex regulatory matters. 
 
Internationally, a decline in trust would diminish foreign direct investment and international loans, 
especially in countries that do not have a robust digital infrastructure to protect trust. Creating and 
supporting such an infrastructure would be an expensive proposition, and diminishing global trust 
would likely deepen the divide between wealthier and poorer states. 11 In addition, perceptions that 
foreign governments are using their technological power to weaken adversaries could set off an 
escalatory spiral of attacks and counterattacks that further diminish trust within societies, making 
agreements between governments even harder to strike. That could promote a world that is not only 
less peaceful and less prosperous, but one with more robust criminal networks that can escape 
government control.